% Last Week Tonight is Dangerous
% 
% 2019-05-29

HBO's *Last Week Tonight* is a show I original stopped watching for its repetitive jokes, but it's recently got me thinking about the underpinnings of its format a bit more. For those of who don't watch or know about the show, it's a late night comedy news program which recaps the major news stories of the previous week with an additional main topic at the end. These main segments bring to light issues that are less about last week (while still current), bigger in scope, and are arguably the main draw to the show. The show also has its own YouTube channel where it uploads these segments which draw in several million views each week. It is these stories/essays/segments and the show's format which present danger in their effects on the audience.

First and foremost, the show is entertainment. That part is obvious; it airs late at night, sometimes has celebrity guests, and is not without its gags and jokes presented by its host, John Oliver. Because it airs late at night (11pm EST on a Sunday), most people probably watch it the following night after work. The timing of this offers an escape from Monday and its side-effects, such as the friction of going from the weekend to the week. But despite being primarily entertainment, it is not without viewers who also use it as a source of news. One could argue that this category of viewers is small, but, as mentioned earlier, these topics are often not bleeding edge and are sometimes out of left field, leaving more viewers (informed about recent events or not) less acquainted with the domain. Already, there is some uneven footing and the show is catching the viewer a little off-guard. Even if the topics are more current, viewers still like a summary of what may be bits and pieces of news for them up until that point. Also, a case could made that the reason these segments are less bleeding edge and bigger in scope is that the writing and production involved in the show requires more time to culminate the piece into a thoughtful story, rather than being a quick refresher of last week's news. Regardless, <recap the uneven balance point here> this **uneven balance** with the viewer becomes a pattern as the segment progresses.

The show's retelling of the previous week's news is not much different from any other parody news program such as *Saturday Night Live*'s Weekend Update. It is the main story that sets the program apart from others and is saved for the end. Once the story commences, there is a noticeable switch in tone. The topics are often somber, such as corrupt elections, U.S. domestic/foreign policy, police brutality, immigration struggles, Donald Trump, and scandals. Through the introduction of the story, the viewer may experience a let-down, of sorts. The retelling of events can trigger one's stress, nervousness, or aggression. At this point, the show can be largely characterized the same as ordinary news outlets: worrisome and exciting because they unsettle us. But then, Oliver starts to throw in jokes. Suddenly, the brain finds comfort in the humor and we are brought back up. We laugh and feel better. The joke softens the blow and before we know it, we've found ourselves on an emotional roller coaster. The show has corrected course for us, but not before it has brought us down first. It has given us the poison *and* the cure.

This up-and-down/ebb-and-flow effect fortifies our experience to the humor and the show. On its own, the jokes may be funny enough, but following a negative experience, the impact is more powerful. This could possibly be related to the [negativity bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negativity_bias) as well as other news-related psychological effects. For one, this course correction strengthens dependence on this show. The story is told rather quickly (as a video) and the viewer may not have much time to think about their stance in response to what is being said, especially if it's the first time hearing about the story. Before they know it, they are uncomfortable with the news and want out. The show gets them out and the viewer appreciates that. News is already a drug and Last Week Tonight amplifies the effect by cutting it with its own humor.

The story usually ends with some optimism. The show recognizes that something should be done about the problem and acts on it. That being said, the problem is usually large and the act of a TV show of its size is predictably small. Examples usually involve an official hashtag that the audience can use as a call to action. While hashtags can be viral, they often aren't and one could argue this could simply be a form of a ratings poll for HBO. Nevertheless, in the viewer's eyes, the problem is getting attention and, whatever the call to action may be, viewers may experience a false sense of contribution. This unpacks an additional concern with the show: its lasting effect on the audience. The show purports itself to be a non-silent voice against big issues while informing viewers in an entertaining way. However, one could argue that this is a wolf in sheep's clothing. The show teases activism, but also achieves a level of comedy that actually quells the audience and any meaningful participation they might act upon. People have talked about passivity from watching too much news before, but Last Week Tonight's brand of news—padded with jokes and empty action—sedates the viewers further. One could speculate that viewers prefer this brand of news over their ordinary news outlets.

I believe humor is a good way to make a point about a problem. If done well, it encapsulates the issue in a shrewd way without sounding snarky or abrasive. However, when big issues are being introduced, comedy breaks them down, makes them less scary, and allows people to glaze over them. The main 'danger' in all of this is when viewers aren't thinking critically and/or are using the show as a news source. As mentioned before, this might include be more people than it seems. People can be up-to-date about current events but still be behind when it comes what the show decides to talk about, thus the show can act as a source for many. The show has a slant and its cynicism towards certain politics is often shared with its audience. However, glazing over these issues is not going to be productive if people want to change what they and the show are criticizing.