% Thoughts on my last months working
% [Erik Bermejo](https://github.com/MariposaGentil)
% Wed 25th Sept 2024

Hi again! I managed to write here for a second day! :)
Just finished working for today. This is being a ride, somedays I'm more motivated than others and It feels like I cannot decide whether or not I do like my job. Whenever I do investigation and design tasks its quite enjoyable, I'm learning how other systems work and makes me solve a puzzle in my head... (and paper... and notion... and confluence...) 

These days I'm working on an initiative where I'm not fully having fun... I got into it with an already stablished team that have way more experience that I do on designing software and just slacked on it. I let them lead the design and I limited myself to ask for doubts... bad decision (obviously) turns out that those people have a brilliant techinical mind, capable of solving complex problems without forgetting about edge cases, but they lack the hability of being aware of the full picture for the project, which led to several problems in the decision making and project management... I could have helped from way earlier on that aspects. It is true though, that I was not motivated with my work when this project launched, and I was feeling that I just wanted to be carried to the end of the initiative. At the end some stakeholders asked me what was going on with this tasks and I replied: *I'm just executing...* which I find really dissapointing as an answer... Obviously the next days I grabbed some strength and got into work documenting and filling the gaps between teams and managed to make other teammates understand that we need better communication. 

That was a couple months ago, now a days, I'm back to *just executing* but this time, things seems that are just finishing and there is little to no coordination left to do... meaning, I'm bored again. Today (among a thousand requests for help from people that delayed me) I started investigating what can we do to implement a new type of release into our systems to (emancipate ourselves) from a third party. That was cool. Half of the feature is already done, but I didn't participated on it. So I had to understand what had been done and what can be done as a follow-up iteration. I got into work and it happend that I had fun :). 


> I just have to try harder to *slide* through my easy work and get into things that I like more often. 
*Sounds easy right?*